[Music]
I was very much struck by how the
translation of the biblical writings
jump started the development of literacy
across the entire world illiteracy was
the norm the pastor's home was the first
school and every morning it would begin
with singing the Christian faith is a
singing religion probably 80 percent of
Scripps memorization today exists only
because of what is sung this is amazing
here we have a Gutenberg Bible printed
on the Press of Johan goodberg science
and religion are opposing forces in the
world but historically that has not been
the case now the book is available to
everyone from Shakespeare to modern
education and medicine and science to to
civilization itself it is the most
influential book in all history and
hopefully people can walk away with at
least a sense of that
in real world messy ill-defined
situations where there's real
uncertainty not risk we've confused
those two the risk is you can assign a
probability right right but real
uncertainty these heuristics actually do
really really well but they do make you
prone to mistake you take your loved one
to the airport and you say don't you say
all these euphemisms for don't die like
text me when you're there safe trip
because you can easily imagine a plane
crashing and when a plane crashes it's
not a crashes it's a disaster it's a
tragedy so the availability and the
representative heuristics are getting
triggered like mad and then you get back
in your car the North American death
machine without giving it a second
thought and that's an act of
self-deception right and it's a
significant so you're not properly
calibrating your level of affect and
arousal to the risks you're facing
that's that's what I mean when I think
the very things that I can't get rid of
the heuristics because then I would face
combinatorial explosion if I try and do
the probability calculations but this is
the no free lunch theorem right well
that's that's the complicating factor of
how much of so you might say well how
much of suffering is due to the
intrinsic nature of finite finitude
that's infinitude how much is due to
ignorance and inevitable blindness and
then how much is due to failure to hit
the mark and wisdom is about being able
to differentiate those and properly
calibrate your efforts to that
differentiation
[Music]
hello everyone watching and listening on
YouTube and Associated platforms I'm
here today in person so that's nice with
Dr John vervaki he's a professor at the
University of Toronto like I am or was
depending on how you look at it
um our work is run in parallel for a
long time probably 20 years maybe longer
than that and we had a lot of students
at the University of Toronto in common
and we've had a lot of discussions on
YouTube uh John and I are both
interested in this issue of the issue of
relevance realization which is uh a very
abstract way of pointing to something
extremely fundamental which is the fact
that certain things announce themselves
to your perception as primary things
attract your attention and attract your
focus and that's a great mystery it's an
immense mystery it might be the immense
mystery in some real sense and so John
has made a tremendous amount of progress
on that front using sources different
than the ones that I've relied on and so
that's made our conversations for me
extremely interesting because we're
trying to address the same problem which
is really the problem of meaning
whatever meaning is but he draws on
literatures that are distinct from those
that I've drawn on and so our
conversations are reproductive because
of that I'm gonna provide a brief bio of
of John and his work and then we're
going to jump right into the talk topics
at hand because there's lots to talk
about on this front so John verviki is
an associate professor in cognitive
psychology and cognitive science at the
University of Toronto his work as I
alluded to construct a bridge between
science and spirituality which we'll
talk about in order to understand the
experience of meaningfulness and the
cultivation of wisdom
so as to afford Awakening from the
meaning crisis the meaning crisis is a
phrase that John's popularized and that
many of you may be familiar with so
welcome good to see you it's good to see
you again you're looking great well
thank you sir it's my Twitter suit so
um I wanted to start I'm going to jump
right into this please there's some very
complicated
and essential issues that I want to talk
to you about I talked with Carl friston
a while back and for those of you
watching Kristen is one of the world's
Premier neuroscientists and he's very
interested in categorization and Ai and
he said something to me that was
extremely Illuminating and I think it's
related to your notion of through line
and also Oneness because one of the
questions John's interested in by the
way is what is it that allows us to
presume that any given thing is one
thing especially when it's made out of
parts and what does it mean for two
things to be similar or identical given
that they're separate and so all of this
is lurking in the background as problems
that need to be solved so friston is
very interested in the use of cognitive
categories to constrain entropy and so
entropy is the proclivity of things to
move in multiple directions and
I've always
construed entropy
uh what regulation and constraint as
constraint of negative emotion but he
pointed out to me that it's importantly
associated with positive emotion so yeah
that makes sense to me there's a huge
neuropsychological literature that
indicates that you experience positive
emotion when you see yourself moving
towards a valued goal that's what the
dopaminergic tract responds to yes and
he pointed out that that's also entropy
reduction because entropy
which is disorder in some sense
something I'd figured out a while ago
but hadn't associated with positive
emotion entropy is something like path
length to a destination and so if you
see the pass links pass links
shrink which means you're getting closer
to your destination you're reducing
entropy but that reduction which is in
advance right a pragmatic Advance is
actually signaled by the positive
emotion system so the negative emotion
system signals an explosion of entropy
which might be part of combinatorial
explosion and part of
um what's the what's the well the mere
fact that things can be perceived in a
multi-frame problems in multitude of
ways so that accounts for negative
emotion but to construe positive emotion
as a response to a decrease in entropy
that's associated with voluntary action
struck me as well it's another form of
unification right because it brings both
emotional channels under the rubric of
entropy reduction and so that relates
them as well to a very fundamental
physical reality insofar as entropy is a
physical reality yeah I mean that's I
mean first of all uh I've haven't met
Carl friston I've worked with a lot of
his students
um and I have met and talked with Andy
Clark
um
um but for me just before we get into
the content what what Carl furston is
doing represents the big picture
cognitive science that I think we need
right the attempt to give get a synoptic
integration like he thinks of it as a
unifying framework across many different
sub-disciplines and so I see one of the
jobs of cognitive Sciences overcoming
the fragmentation within psychology and
then overcoming the fragmentation
between the various minded disciplines
like psychology AI neuroscience and his
work is doing that and that is the kind
of work I Aspire uh to doing as well so
first of all I think that's really
important I would argue it's not the
sole cause but I would think I would
argue a contributing factor to the
replication crisis is the fact that
we're over privileged over privileging
innovation
as opposed to integration in Psychology
so what we're getting is we're getting
these very narrow very almost effect
specialized I have a theory about this
effect I have a theory about this stuff
like that and and so the the the the the
the controlled
uh theoretical framework you need in
order to make sure that these the
constructs are plausible they're clear
that you they're intelligible they're
intelligible you don't have you know the
jingle jangle problem in Psychology get
rid of all of that kind of thing and so
I think that that kind of work is
exemplary I I think he's also I think
it's also really good work I think it's
careful it's mathematically rigorous you
know I work we he has a student
um uh Mark Miller who's also one of my
former students and I work a lot with
Mark
um he actually got a huge cert Grant to
come to Toronto and we're going to work
together on a lot of this stuff and Mark
has been one of the people in fact just
to bring it back around who has been
really trying to integrate the
predictive processing framework with
affect right right right right right
yeah right well there's yeah well it's
very so that because it isn't obvious
that the AI models for example
experience anything that you might
consider akin to emotion but if you can
relate negative emotion into an
explosion of potential Pathways I think
and relate positive emotion to a
reduction then you're starting to make a
very tight connection between
information processing and emotional
experience let's say or or at least the
meaning of emotional experience right
and but that's where his work and my
work starts to integrate uh because a
way of Translating that reduction of
entropy I do want to get back to the
theme of you know a shared grammar
between cognition and reality yeah but
but first you know a psychological way
of understanding uh that uh the the the
affect is around the notion of basically
surprise reduction so the idea right
right the idea is the brain is trying to
um I predict I would argue a better term
is anticipation but we can come back to
the the brain is trying to predict the
world
um because the more it can predict the
world the more adaptive capacity it has
to be proactive it's very easy it's much
better to avoid the tiger than to
confront the tiger right and then the
thing about that is you know when you
like when I first say this to my
students I start oh so you the brain is
this massively recursive system for
reducing surprise a lot of them will say
but I like surprises and you go yeah
that's right and then and so then you
start to get this question about well
you want to reduce you want to reduce
surprise right but it's not sort of
absolute reduction it's more like the
rate and and then you're playing the
rates at a different longitudinal scales
yeah so I might like the short-term
surprise for my birthday party because
it's a long-term predictor of stable
relationships so my long term right uh
ability to protect the environment goes
up because all of these people have done
all of this intricate work to surprise
me at the party so I just want to make
it clear because if people easily get
this confused with he's just proposing
some simplistic just you know just make
just reduce surprise yeah across the
board so then you get this very
accidental surprise in some sense and I
know I know that's not a complete uh
solution to the problem either because
some accidental surprises are positive
but yeah we're much happier about
surprise if we encounter it voluntarily
and then there's a re there's a rate
problem there that's proportionate to
something like depth and that's
associated with the phenomenon of
meaning as well yes so so let me take
um
frisk's argument apart
a little bit more because I asked him a
very specific question so I asked him if
he thought that basic perceptual
categories were micro narratives
right so because one of the one of the
places that your work and I and mine
dovetail is in our observation that the
very categories of perception that make
themselves manifest to us aren't simple
objects no right that's where you bring
in the neoplatonic teleology agent Arena
relationship right right and so what we
seem to see in the world are patterns
that have functional utility and the
functional utility is construed in
relationship to a goal and of course
then that brings up the question of what
should the goal be and is there such a
thing as an integrated goal and so
there's a pragmatism
like the empiricists and the
rationalists but let's say the
empiricists to begin with seem to
presume that what we see in the world
are objects and then we derive meaning
we impose a meaning on top of that and
that isn't how it works is that the very
things we see as objects are tools that
we use in relationship to goals and some
of those can be described objectively
but that isn't the essence of perception
itself no I agree and if you get so if
you look at the even the history of the
psychology of uh of categorization there
there's a there's a there are sort of
two fundamental presuppositions that
have been we're running through it that
point to exactly what you're talking
about that really sort of kick started
to come into question in the mid 80s
early 80s and then gathered steam well
neural networks and now they're to the
four but there was the idea that
um
concepts are just lists of features yeah
right lists of features yeah and that
the primary function of a concept is to
label the world and describe it and
that's that's turned both of those which
are sort of often uh it's interesting
because when you ask people what they
think concepts are that's what they tell
you that there's features there's the
list two things are identical if they
share the same list of features yeah
yeah it's axiomatic yeah and that's what
they think yeah but that's not how they
actually do the categories because that
won't give you categorization yeah right
and so the and Kristen's work points to
a fundamental and it belongs to a much
broader uh framework
about no no what concepts are is their
generative models they they are a
structural functional organization of
features that allow us to predict and
explain how things are going to behave
especially with relationship to us all
right so and then what you and that's
the pragmatism element right in the
functional element exactly and so you
get different a much different notion of
similarity so instead of thinking of uh
here's these two feature lists and then
you get Goodman's problem of what goes
on the features right right right and
all that stuff we've talked about here's
another idea
let's say I have these two generative
models and could I how many steps can I
go back where I can trace them back to a
common shared degenerative model it's
like an evolutionary so if two things
are similar if they have an ancestor
generative model that is close to them
and they're dissimilar if you have to go
through a lot of transformations to get
them back to a shared generative model
so we're judging I I thought of that
actually a variant of that as a way of
determining whether something was real
you know well can you imagine two
measurement methods that are similar or
different you might say well what makes
them you want to measure the same thing
in as many different ways as you can to
calibrate its reality yes but then you
run into the thorny problem of what
makes two measurement systems different
and one of the answers to that on the
conceptual uh level at least is distance
evolutionarily yeah like there might be
a domain of measurement that emerged
Christian in physics and a domain of
measurement that emerged in Psychology
and so they don't share a lot of
underlying axiomatic presuppositions
exactly and if you bring both of them to
bear on the problem and they report the
same pattern then you can be reasonably
sure that that pattern exists
independent of your projection and it's
kind of what your senses do too right
because you have five senses and they're
really qualitatively different like
vision and audition are extremely
different and audition and vision and
touch are extremely different and we use
uh it's not triangulation I guess it's
quintangulation to zero in on patterns
to see if they're replicable across all
the sensory domains and and that's also
a form of of what would you call
analysis by by optimally different
measurement systems okay and then and
then that is a way and that connects to
research and work I do that can help to
supply the missing normativity for
pragmatism the problem with pragmatism
is they had this very nebulous concept
of utility which was very hard to to to
get any sort of yeah uh you know
normative guidance
but what you just described this goes
towards a lot of the literature uh I'm
sort of pointing here that's converging
on the notion of plausibility now
there's two senses of plausibility one
is just a synonym for highly probable
but another is that when we invoke
things like say that makes good sense or
that's to reason yeah right oh yeah yeah
yeah I get that yeah those kinds of
judgments and what it's turning out is
what you're getting in plausibility is
it the pleasant half of plausibility is
that like like you said when you have
convergence from many different and they
converge to the same source and and the
reason why that gives you what Nash
should call I'm sorry Russia calls
um uh trustworthiness yeah because the
chance so if I have just one information
Channel my the chance that my conclusion
is being affected by bias in the system
is significant right but if I have a
multiple converging ones yeah the chance
of them sharing all of those biases is
very low very low yeah and it probably
decreases exponentially as the number of
measurements that you use to to to to to
assess the reality of a given phenomenon
increases right but you hit a law of
diminishing returns right right right at
some point you know a friend of mine
says you know for human beings one is
I'll think about it two is maybe three
well three or four it's like yeah yeah
yeah yeah sort of the working memory
capacity kind of thing right but that's
not all you want for plausibility you
also want the thing here to have that
structural functional organization you
want it to not just be a feature list
you want it to be a generative model
things that can predict counter factuals
because what you want that construct
also to do is you want it to be able to
cook to go in to many different domains
and find and formulate problems well so
it has to have this Elegance so it has
convergence so that would be multi-multi
abstinence yeah right right so yeah so
that would be utility across a broad
range of potential applications that's
right that makes a nice tool right is
that you can use it for more than one
thing so you know uh you know four
sequence times acceleration you can use
it for talking about whales floating in
the water you can use it for talking
about you know planets circling a sun
you can use to talk about bullets right
across situational General generality
right so and and so and then the the
third thing you want is you want balance
right
um and and so if I give you a tremendous
amount of convergence to something that
has very little Elegance well that's
trivial right it doesn't say it's false
you say it's true right right well and
that's and that's actually the fate of
most facts and this is related to this
problem in Psychology it's always struck
me
um in relationship to the social
sciences is that our method of movement
forward is incremental fact Gathering
but the problem with that is that
there's an infinite number of facts yes
and most of them are irrelevant and so
without these unifying theories exactly
then you can't you can't integrate
across the facts in any coherent Manner
and you just get you just get the
endless generation of well valid in some
sense but pointless facts right and
that's that goes to the point we were
talking about with with Tristan's work
yeah about generating those Frameworks
that bring all the things together and
you're getting a generative model rather
than just a feature list of facts right
right and then but you also like I said
you you get triviality you also get the
reverse if I have very little trust
within this but the promise of a lot of
Elegance that's when we think of
something as far-fetched like if you
just believe that the the the the
British Monarchy are lizard peoples from
space look at all the things I can
explain and so you get that you can get
far-fetchedness right and you if you
actually pay attention and this is where
the conspiracy theories in some sense
make themselves manifest that's exactly
right when they're true right and then
you get and you can also equivocate you
can do Martin Bailey and uh a lot of
things where you like you you you seem
to be doing this but you're actually
equivocating like a deepity uh so you
know love is a four-letter word okay on
the graphic side that is highly
convergent it's absolutely trivial who
cares but then you think that they're
they're not talking about the grapheme
right the you think they're talking
about the concept of love so you
equivocate and you and then you think
something important is being said about
this phenomena that ramifies for your
whole life so you've got convergence to
triviality that then equivocates to
something that's profound that would
promise but there's nothing being said
when you say love is important like how
how
is that sort of proving that love is an
inconsequential Phenom of course not but
it sounds so you can get all kinds this
I'm trying to show the way the
plausibility Machinery just gets misused
and misled pervasively in our culture so
you want that balance
[Music]
the current administration's New Year's
goals are to tax spend and turn a blind
eye to inflation if this is at odds with
your goals if you are tired of the
government playing games with your
savings and your retirement plans then
you need to get in touch with the
experts at Birch gold today for over 5
000 years gold has withstood inflation
geopolitical turmoil and stock market
crashes with help from the experts at
Birch gold you can own gold and attack
sheltered retirement account Birch gold
makes it easy to convert an IRA or 401K
into an IRA in Precious Metals just text
Jordan to 989898 to claim your free info
kit on gold and then talk to one of
their precious metals Specialists Birch
gold will hold your hand through the
entire process text Jordan to 989898 and
protect yourself with gold today with an
A plus rating with the Better Business
Bureau thousands of happy customers and
countless five-star reviews you can
trust Birch gold to help protect your
savings text Jordan to
989898 today
[Music]
that's another form of of triangulation
in some sense yes yes so I wanted to
explain to everybody who's listening a
little bit more about this idea of
entropy just so that sure it can be made
more understandable so imagine that
you're you're driving to work and uh
you're in your car and your car isn't
bothering you you're not attending to
your car apart from the fact that you
have to drive it and the reason that
you're not attending to your car is
because it's performing its proper
function as a car in relationship to
your goal which means that it is moving
you down the road reliably now imagine
what happens in your imagination when
your car stops let's say it stops on a
busy highway now what's happened is the
path length to your destination and to
also other multiple potential
destinations has now become
indeterminately large so and then
imagine that the search space opens up
and so like now you're off to the side
of the road with your car well your
first set of problems is your whole day
is now messed how are you going to get
to work right so you have to compute a
whole variety of potential Pathways in
the world just in relationship to your
day and then while you have the broader
problem of the fact that your car is now
no longer a car it's a useless chunk of
metal that you're trapped in in a
dangerous situation and you have no idea
how to fix it and maybe you have no idea
where to take it and so the collapse of
the Simplicity of your car as an
affordance in relationship to a proximal
goal has exposed you to entropy and
entropy is the multiplication of the
problems that now beset you and category
collapse does that and so if you
understand this if you if you understand
that your perception of car is dependent
on the maintenance maintenance of its
function in relationship to a goal you
start to understand something very
fundamental about categories themselves
because everything you see in the world
has this nature it's a it's a Unity of
form which is something that the
empiricists can concentrate on but it's
a Unity of form in relationship to a
goal and that's built right into the
perception of the so-called object
itself and so
um your object perception is
constraining entropy by organizing the
world into categories that are
functionally relevant to goals that you
uh that you maintain either explicitly
or even more importantly implicitly and
category collapse produces this increase
in entropy now you feel positive emotion
when you see yourself moving towards a
valued goal and you feel negative
emotion when some uncertainty with
relationship to that goal is manifested
itself or when you encounter uh say a
determinate obstacle that you have to
walk around and so that's part of the
way that to go back to an earlier
section of this discussion that you can
relate emotion to both cognition and
categorization so this issue of entropy
reduction is crucially important because
it's well it's at the basis of
categorization itself now
the reason I'd asked
uh Kristen about
categories as micro narratives is
because I was very curious I'm very
curious and and this is probably more
relevant to your work on spirituality so
one of the things you point out in the
recent lecture you did for Ralston
college is that
even the perception of a given object is
dependent on some sense of Oneness yes
and so Piaget was very interested in
this is like why is this one thing yes
right because it's not there you know
now it's now it's two things and things
don't have to be physically contiguous
to be one thing right right and so the
question is what constitutes the Oneness
of the thing given that it's
fractionable in an infinite number of
ways yeah and so
um and then another question that
emerges out of that is what makes two
cell phones in the same category okay so
let me run a hypothesis by you and tell
me what you think about that so I think
that things are one
first of all they're one if you can use
them for a specific Purpose with a
specific sequence of actions in
relationship to a given goal but they're
interspersible so they're the same if
you can replace them functionally in the
same pattern of operations with no
transformation of the path
so so they're they're they're they're
they're they're they're the same because
they're functionally equivalent in
relationship to a goal not because they
they share a set of features so anything
that's swappable is the same yeah but
that is dependent on a teleology it's
necessarily dependent on a teleology
yeah I mean this is the this is the and
this is not a criticism this is a
classical notion of multiple
realizability so I can have the same
program Excel and I can run it on many
different machines so the actual
physical instantiation can be different
as long right as I'm getting the
reliable same generative models as long
as I I've got the same formal system
running that's why you that in fact you
don't think that there was one pattern
one program here and one program there
think about it we think about this
abstract entity a computer program or
even a file you can you move it yeah and
you move it yeah what what space are you
moving it through like the language has
come so readily to us yeah you're doing
this thing where you're moving it from
one computer to another uh because of
exactly that because you say oh
degenerative model here and here there's
no and this is an important
qualification there's no relevant
difference
um like for example this one might run a
little bit slower on this computer than
here but if it doesn't impact on how you
can use it right then then it's then
it's it's the same enough yes now I want
to I wanted to introduce and this will
help
get us into a little bit more I've
recently published a paper with Brett
Anderson and Mark Miller on integrating
the relevance realization framework and
the predictive processing framework you
want to do entropy production but if you
if you look at Network Theory you you
and the way you explain it in terms of
path reduction is really important here
so there's three basic kinds of networks
networks are just ways in which things
are connected like sequences or or the
way an airline is connected or the way
the internet is connected or the way
neurons are connected functional
connectivity so there's a regular
Network which is nodes are just things
that are connected you have all the all
the connections are just one step away
node to node right
and then there's what's called a random
network is where you can have long
distance connections very long distance
you mentioned right so I don't have to
fly you know from Savannah to Atlanta to
blow I can just fly directly from
Savannah to Toronto something like that
yeah right so
the regular network is highly
inefficient the way you measure
efficiency is called mean path distance
you take all the distance from all
possible combination how many steps do I
have to go from this point to that point
and then you take all of them and you
average them together and you get the
mean path distance the average path
distance between any two points in a
regular Network it's very very it's very
very high you have to go through a lot
of steps and a regular network is one
where they're all connected with all
local connections yeah so when you look
at it it looks beautiful it's highly
ordered because everyone and all the
lines are the same length and everything
and but it's highly inefficient
right the the the random network is
highly efficient because you have a lot
of these long distance connections that
collapse your path right you mean path
distance but you don't the brain doesn't
go for either one of those
because there's a trade-off relationship
as I make the network more random to
make it more efficient which sounds like
a contradiction in our terms but it's
not yeah I lose I lose I lose robustness
in the system
so think about it when you're when when
you're when you have a lot of these
little connections they're often there's
lots of redundancy right yeah and so I
can lose a lot of stuff and I get
graceful degradation I only get a small
reduction I have this random Network I
can take out one link and entire nodes
can become isolated from each other
right so that's the danger of efficiency
versus redundancy we have so what you
want what what the brain does is what's
called small world Network yeah so a
small world network is mostly regular
and then one or two long distance
connections yeah so I pointed this out
before and and is that associated with
with the manner in which the cortical
columns organize themselves because
there's there's a lot of micro
connections within cortical columns that
are very fast and efficient and
relatively sparse connections between
cortical columns yeah yeah the cortex by
the way the cortex is made up of these
cortical columns which are uh replicated
units of about I think it's a hundred
thousand neurons each with ten thousand
connections certain neuron something
like that and then that's structures
replicated that makes up the cortical
sheet so I mean everything we're talking
about right now is is is in one sense
controversial there's a lot I'm not
saying anything that doesn't have a lot
of good empirical evidence for it but
you know we're relying on technologies
that are still like fmri and density EG
that don't give us the kind of precision
like so I want to say that I'm not
saying anything ridiculous here but I
don't want to claim like we've come
subject to revision yeah yeah yeah right
but it looks like the brain is organized
at multiple levels of analysis not only
top down but back front and in out
um in small world Network formation and
and here's some really interesting
things
so you give somebody uh propofol and you
take them into unconscious the brain
will go from being a global small world
Network into it'll break up into small
local regular networks and then as you
bring them back into Consciousness it'll
go from those local regular networks
back into a comprehensive small so
Carhartt Harris talks about criticality
and Consciousness and so how do you
understand
totally totally yeah so how do you
understand the relationship between
so Carhartt Harris and other people and
I talked about this in maps yeah exactly
and it's on the border between Chaos and
Order that's the technical okay so how
is that related how do you understand
the relationship between that
connectivity it's great okay and then
and then I want to bring it to a
phenomena of insight because insight has
that combination of initial surprise
yeah and then long-term gain yeah yeah
we talked about is it long-term or
iterable gain it depends I mean you can
have you can you can have I mean you can
have a systematic Insight you can have
the kind of insight that Piaget talks
about which it's not an insight into
this problem it's an insight into a
system yeah yeah or you can have just an
insight into this problem like the nine
dot problem and it's just in the future
you'll know how to do that and the first
Insight would be a deeper Insight than
the second yes and that's like a
technical definition of deep yes yes
exactly which is a fun thing that's
something we just talk about too is what
it means technically for something to be
deep okay so back to Consciousness and
and network organization right okay so
we've talked about small world Network
um
and so what the brain seems to be doing
is and and the especially the work I've
done recently with Brad and Mark
um it's not just redundancy the brain is
training between and this is helpful
because it's not too easy between
efficiency and evolvability in the
technical sense that's coming out of
biology which is the term is degeneracy
but I don't like to use the term
degeneracy because it means degenerate
away from it because when when the
average person hears that is yeah
degeneracy what the hell wrong
connotations man they're bad naming bad
name so evolvability is you you want
enough redundancy and overlap in your
system to be resilient right so just
quick just very quick uh you have the
robustness problem in biology which is
you want a lot of variation in the
species but you don't want to be the
individual that has the variation right
because you're the chances are you're
going to get killed right so what you do
is you you and this is the work of
Andreas Wagner you you at the at the at
the level of of the genotype you have
quite a bit of this degeneracy and
overlap and evolvability in right in the
in the genome but it doesn't show up in
phenotypical differences so there's not
significant Behavior but as soon as
there's a change in the environment The
genome is ready to shift and produce a
new a new phenotypical Behavior so that
you know that the older the uh the older
the
the the gene structure that codes for
morphology the less likely it is to
avoid correction if it's mutated yes yes
that's a relatively new finding eh so it
looks like even at the at the mutation
level that biology will will play with
the fringes but leave the center intact
so mutations are basically random and
they can occur anywhere in the genome
but if it's a fundamental element of the
genome the error correction systems
replace it back to exactly what it was
yes so I think that's analogous to this
issue we're getting at in terms of
optimized learning foreign
[Music]
with the start of the New Year upon us
what better time than now to start
building a habit of Prayer just like
physical exercise daily spiritual
exercise is critical to your well-being
especially in a world where attacks on
faith and religion are happening all
around us every day
hallow the number one Christian Prayer
app in the U.S and the number one
Catholic app in the world helps you
maintain a daily prayer routine
it's filled with studies meditations and
Reflections including the number one
Christian podcast the Bible in a year
download the app for free at hallow.com
Jordan you can set prayer reminders
invite others to pray with you and track
your progress along the way
make this year your year for spiritual
growth and peace
get an exclusive three-month free trial
at hallow.com Jordan that's hallow.com
Jordan
yeah so you want you want your system
um like you know in the 80s when they
did the downsizing in the corporations
to make them very efficient and the
problem right the problem is you this
they became brittle they they couldn't
if there was a sudden change in the mark
because everybody's working at the max
well Bob can you do this as well no I'm
sorry I'm working right there's there's
no evolvability in this system and so
there's there's a lot of work coming out
now that natural selection doesn't just
select for traits it selects for the
metatrade of evolvability because if you
if if you and I are basically equal and
we have more evolvability as long as the
environment's stable there's Nothing's
Gonna
right differentiate it yeah but if
there's a sudden change in the
environment I'll get what's called I'll
get the innovator uh Advantage yeah I
will I will evolve faster and then I
will go into the new Niche and I might
not be optimally fitted for that Niche
right right I will propagate and fill
that Niche so much that it's that's
General cognitive ability yes yes yes
okay so right so what you're doing now
back to self-organizing critical yeah so
what you're doing is
and this is a goes to a paper I
published with Leo Ferraro way back in
2013. we actually talked about this at
one point you used to have the
metapsychology group
the publication so by the way thank you
good good good
so again
subject to revision but what looks like
happening which the brain is oscillating
between two different states there's the
neurons fire in synchrony and that seems
to do something like data compression
and data compression is like when you
draw the line of best fit on a scatter
plot you're basically a lot you're
throwing out a lot of variants so that
you get clean interpolation and
extrapolation so right generalizes just
in some sense yes you get but just
allows you to generalize the two G's
right yeah it just allows you to
generalize okay right now but then the
the brain like Avalanches
all the neurons will fire in asynchrony
now what that does is that Mutual
predictability goes down entropy is
going up why would the brain do that
because when it does that that opens up
an opportunity for it to evolve Anew
that's what the psychedelics are doing
then yes yes right and so what the brain
is doing is it's constantly right it's
it it it self-organizes and then it goes
critical it breaks up not too much it
breaks up enough so that it can now
reconfigure in something different and
it and so what you're doing is you're
not just getting a One-Shot you're
you're actually exploring different
generalizations that are possible within
the state space
did that make so if you can get the
brain on that edge right where it's
constantly doing this and there's been
some okay so now that also well that
takes us very interestingly so and
people should attend to this because I
think it's crucial is that
we have a debate in our society probably
since the enlightenment about whether
the phenomenon of meaning is real in any
real sense and it tends to be downplayed
by empiricists because it's not
objective but it seems to me highly
probable that the sense of meaning most
fundamentally is a signal of the
operation of the optimization of this
process is that right is that we want to
put ourselves on the edge where things
are predictable enough so that we get
what we need and want but so that at the
same time we're expanding our adaptive
competence in a variety of domains
simultaneously exactly and I think
meaning so so here's a way of thinking
about this existentially so imagine that
you're pursuing a given goal whatever it
is maybe you want to get married you
want to have children and then you think
well who the hell cares in a hundred
thousand years what difference is it
going to make anyways and then all your
motivational energy is drained out by
that sort of nihilistic thought now one
thing you can think in relationship ship
to that is well that nihilistic thought
is accurate because that's a
superordinate time frame and if you had
any sense that's the time frame across
which you would evaluate things and you
just have to pay the price of the non of
the meaninglessness of your life or you
could say well wait a second
if I'm pursuing a goal and I use a frame
of interpretation that renders it a
motivational one possibility is that I'm
using a counterproductive frame of
reference and that's actually what my
nervous system is signaling to me so one
of the discussions we could have is like
is it reasonable epistemologically and
even ontologically to use your sense of
deep meaning as a guide to Optimal
functioning in the world like I think
it's the Instinct that is literally that
guide so I think
there's like 17 things I want to say
that's really powerful
um first thing uh I think Thomas Nagel
is right uh nihilism is is not generated
by argument because the arguments are
actually technically not valid so if
someone says well a hundred thousand
years
from now won't matter it's symmetrical
what's happening a hundred thousand
years from now doesn't matter to you
right it has no normative right why is
that right yes why is that a relevant
fact exactly yes yes because you're
making an implicit presumption exactly
that the wider time frame exactly yeah
yeah yes exactly exactly so that's the
first point right and and so for him and
I agree with him it's not a matter of a
propositional argument it's a matter of
you haven't learned how to properly
integrate your different perspectives
right right first person perspective the
cosmic there and you know this is what I
think things like you know 40 cognitive
science and neoplatonism are about how
do we properly cultivate the virtues for
managing and improving the relationship
between our pers our perspectives yes
which is that's the Jacob's Ladder
problem yes yes so that second thing is
uh when this goes towards you know this
is something you and I have both talked
and comment and I I you know
um we haven't come we've talked a lot
about and I I was privileged to work
with John Kennedy
is the notion of you know real
relationship Gibson's notion of
affordance is a crucial one right is
that no no no let's go to uh you know
biology and adaptivity is adaptivity in
the organism of course not that doesn't
make any sense it's a great white chart
adaptive well not if you put it in the
Sahara Desert like is the adaptivity in
the environment well that doesn't make
any it's a real relationship between
it's the way they're really coupled and
there are real couplings that make a
real difference right and so we we have
to get away from like the we have to get
away from that Cartesian exhaustive the
problem with the Cartesian exhaustive
divide is it gives you nothing that
relates the subjective to the objective
right which means truth is and is not
possible Right but it also means that
meaning evaporates in some real sense
because it's reduced to the subjective
and then that's reduced to the arbitrary
and then that just disintegrates and
that doesn't work because well I don't
think it works biologically either
because
meaning does appear to me to be
something akin to a profound Instinct
and even from an objective perspective
you have to make the supposition that uh
an actual biological instinct is real
and so the the idea of the object eats
itself in that regard in some
fundamental sense this is kind of the
argument that I always tried to have
with Sam Harris it's like there's a
contradiction between the darwinian
notion of reality and the Newtonian or
Cartesian idea of reality well because
there's a reality that has something to
do with this notion of fit yeah right of
of of relationship between the
subjective and the objective right and
and and the Newtonian and the Cartesian
are formal systems Darwin's theory of
evolution is the first significant and
important dynamical systems theory
within science in which the
self-organization of the system and it's
coupling to the world are constitutive
of the kind of entity it is right
including as category or as ident as
entities of categorization and deception
yes now let's go back to the adaptivity
and and and and the and the
self-organizing so the self-organizing
criticality think about what it's doing
think about how it is darwinian right so
you get you get the Avalanche that
introduces variation and then you get
some compression that selects from it
yeah and then a new variation and and
you know so what the brain is doing at
Mike is it's implementing the same
grammar by which biological evolution
across species are fitting them to the
environment your brain is doing this
self-organizing criticality that is
constantly evolving you're adaptive your
cognitive adaptive fit to the
environment okay so that's also why just
to point out to everyone that's actually
also why zero-sum economic models are
false is because the zero-sum economic
model presumes a fixed reality in
relationship to affordances yeah and
there is no fixed reality and the way
that we've we've superseded the limits
to growth in in perhaps not an absolute
sense but in some very important sense
is that we do have this capacity I think
it was Alfred North Whitehead said that
we can let our ideas and Concepts die
instead of us right and so we we can you
might say well it's a zero-sum game
economically speaking there's only so
much that you and I can share but the
there's an implicit part of that
argument which is well given the manner
in which we structured our relationships
and the environment
that might be true but then it's an open
question how much restructuring of those
a priority axioms can we do yes and the
answer is well an indefinite amount
right they're unbelievably good at that
and we can do more with less all the
time yeah so I I agree with that and and
and and and and and and and
that I mean because we we can take it up
into levels of of symbolic abstraction
well you know this you get you get you
put person in sing and I'll give you
five dollars will you take it of course
now you put them in this situation I'll
give you five dollars and I give you ten
dollars but you only get to keep your
five if you let him keep his ten yeah
most people I don't want it even though
they could get the five dollars they
don't want to belong to the system that
is right right right so they move up a
level of abstract they don't want to
participate in what they see as
perceived unfairness well and that's I
think because they're playing a
medication exact situation right and
what I was going to say is like the the
degree to which we can abstract The Meta
games we're playing yeah yeah like it I
I I don't know of any formal argument
that says it stops at this level you
have to go towards your point yeah bring
it back one more thing around so the
brain is evolving it's uh and I think
this has a lot this is what basically
what is going on in relevance
realization you can see it in your
attention you know default mode and task
Center default is making you mind wander
and you introduce variation and then
tasks selects and then you vary you kill
off most of the variations but some of
them come in because you might wondered
enough you can do this and Stefan and
Dixon you give people a problem like an
inside problem and they're impassing
they can't solve it and you just
introduce a little bit of entropy into
the system like you put some static on
the computer screen or you shake it and
then they'll have the Insight because it
puts in enough criticality right so they
stop this uni-dimensional task focused
attention right and it allows the spread
of activation right and then and then
they reselect and they evolve a new way
of framing the problem you get the
honest well so that would mean in some
sense okay so imagine that you snap out
of gold focused attention this reminds
me of the psychoanalytic idea so Freud
would put his class into a state of free
association right and so Freud's tack
was
tried just to say whatever comes into
your mind or describe your fantasies and
just let yourself talk right no
self-censorship and so really what he
meant by that was abandon any uh
instrumental goal focused attention for
the moment and let your mind wander Jung
did a lot of this too yes he did a lot
of
um purposeful fantasizing right he just
let himself yeah that's a contradiction
in terms he let his mind wander he would
have discussions with the characters of
his imagination for example it's a very
hallucinogenic in some real sense but
you can imagine that
imagine there's a hierarchy of goals
yeah
and
you move from a Unity at the top of the
hierarchy to a plurality yes at any
given moment when you're focusing your
attention you're using the Center focus
of your attention as the main source of
unity and that's reducing everything to
an a priority set of perceptions and
principles but then you let that go well
now you have these diverse networks in
your brain that can they all have a
slightly different way of looking at the
same situation exactly and you can let
them have an internal dialogue
essentially yeah and some of those one
of the things the psychoanalysts pointed
out is some of those can be in like so
imagine for example that you're angry at
someone and so you allow yourself or to
notice the fantasies that you're
generating as a consequence of the anger
right and you'll see maybe you have a
very violent fantasy
um and and something that's highly
aggressive well you're being informed
that part of your category system has
that vengefulness say as a goal and that
actually might be relevant in some sense
if you could figure out how to integrate
that in related goal to a higher set of
principles right you don't want to
produce absolute bloody ma'am because
that doesn't iterate well across
instances but that doesn't mean you
should ignore the input of these
subsidiary systems exactly I bet that so
you introduced the the very so when your
variation differentiation right and then
but differentiation that has the
potential to reconverge that's right and
so you get a system simultaneously
differentiating and integrating it
becomes what Kelso and others call
metastable the system is complexifying
it can do a greater variety of things
while remaining integrated as an agent
it doesn't yeah right right right right
right right and so what you want is
that's what happens by the way in the
shark Cathedral when you wander the maze
so that's the symbolic representation
there right so the idea is you go into
the maze in one section and then you
walk all four quadrants of the world
right so you have to cover all the
territory and that way you get to the
center and so the idea there is maximum
differentiation as a consequence of
voluntary experience that pushes
together towards a Unity exactly and so
what what you get is a system that is
complexifying and if it's done right
it's it it because of this real adaptive
fittedness its complexification is
increasingly conforming to the
complexity of the world yeah right so
right that's the scientific Enterprise
in some sense right that's that's that
calibration against Real World patterns
synoptic integration and not just
differentiation over Innovation for your
career yes right yes yes yes yes there
is that okay so that self-organizing
criticality now here's the thing so if
we're gonna when a system is let's I'll
use the heb's firing wiring distinction
when it fires in self-organizing
criticality it tends to create a small
world Network wiring because it's mostly
it's it's organized right and when it's
organized that orders it but when it
breaks apart that opens up the
possibility of one of these
long-distance connections yeah yeah now
if a system starts to wire as a small
world Network what's mostly regular
connections keeping you doing in the
norm but it has a few long distance
connections that can suddenly snap you
out it's like the balance between
conservatism and liberalism there well
yeah it is it is and so
small if it fires as a small world it
fires itself organizing critically it
tends to wire as a small world Network
and if it wires as a small world Network
it tends to fire as self-organizing
criticality so these two things can
actually mutually inform each other they
and so if you can get it right you can
be right you can be organizing your
brain so that you make it more capable
of this evolving of Framing and as you
get better at doing that that will tend
to reinforce you organizing your brain
so there's a real possibility here for
people to do that yeah right to get that
that that that sort of reciprocal
opening of a virtuous cycle going on
it's interesting that we have two diff
we have that self-organizing criticality
theory of insight so Insight is you've
you've you you you have to break out of
an inappropriate frame that's the
criticality and it reorganizes into the
better you do that Evolution but showing
yeah and better would be something like
both efficient and capable of performing
a broader range of actions that was like
a piagetian description of what
constituted a better Theory a better
Theory allows you to do everything the
previous Theory allowed you to do plus
something more hopefully with a gain of
efficiency right and that's a definition
of better but you you you want to keep
so a good theory right a good theory is
efficient in that sense but a good
theory is also generative so you're
always trying to optimize between
efficiency and evolvability that yeah
right and so like you said you you don't
you don't just do compression that's
epilepsy if your brain just fires in a
completely synchronous thing that's
epilepsy right because you just locked
the system down it has no capacity to
adaptively refit itself to the world so
the brain is constantly I think of this
actually as mapping on uh to Piaget's
notion of assimilation accommodation
yeah yeah assimilation is compression
making everything integrated
accommodations yeah and then the
collaboration is this dynamical
constantly trading between them so
you're not you don't come to any kind of
stable thing you you're constantly
evolved in the theory you don't find the
final Theory right you're constantly
moving to a theory that grabs more
differences and yet brings them into an
integration and then the theory has yeah
well one of Piaget's points in in his
writing and I mean he said this
explicitly was that the task of uh
genetic epistemology was to specify the
process by which the balance between
assimilation and accommodation occurs
exactly yeah and that has something to
do with okay so two questions
so we we've already put forward the
hypothesis that the Instinct for meaning
is something like a marker for the
proper uh expansion and organization of
of the category system of the brain
itself or maybe even related to health
but then there's another interesting
thing that that Carhartt Harris and and
people like him have been concentrating
on which is that the phenomenon of
Consciousness itself yes which is being
itself in some real sense insofar as you
have to be conscious of things for them
to be is that I still don't understand
how this gets us out of the so-called
zombie problem it's like why is it that
Consciousness itself and this sense of
being is associated with operation on
this meaningful Edge okay and that's a
great question to ask right because I've
already said there are relationships
between small world Network formation
and how conscious you are and there's
also relationships between
self-organizing criticality so you can
get uh
you can present people to visual stimuli
that are are put on the visual system so
the brain is constantly flipping between
them like a triangle and a square and
what you can have what you can see is
self-organizing criticality moving
between areas as the brain is flipping
in Consciousness between the triangle
and the square right so two different
patterns yeah perception each Associated
yes or independent Consciousness okay so
here's uh like I've been alluding to
that I think a lot of this stuff is how
we're implementing if I can put one more
piece on this I can get to your
Consciousness okay let's go back that's
worth it okay willing to wait around for
that so you're trying to do you're
trying to do you know predictive
processing and and and you know and they
pick up on hinton's insight and then
friston has it too the brain doesn't try
and predict the world it tries to
predict itself in its interaction with
the world which is really a really
profound idea right and and and
prediction this is why I say a better
term is anticipation it's not just
predicting it's attempting to complete
so right it's trying to predict it's
also something by the way way that's the
problem I've always had with the
prediction models is there's a cold
cognitive element to it because we
really want we really want to have
happen in the world what we desire let's
say so it's not just cold prediction
right and this is a a slogan I've been
putting relevance realization is not
called calculation right okay okay I
didn't know you had formulated yes yes
so so
the the pro so predictive processing
you're doing all this stuff but the
question and we've you've bumped into it
already is well what do I predict right
and you can't do you can't do initially
teleological answers because they pursue
they presume right that you've got some
capacity to represent the environment so
you you have to
there's a long argument here I'll just
I'll just sort of deak around it what
you have to do is you have to have the
the system has to have an internal way
of deciding which
which error signals and generative
models it's going to prioritize right
yes yes it certainly needs that yes so
that's called Precision waiting within
predictive and their theory of precision
weighting is explicitly that that is
what selective attention is and this
maps on to the models yeah of a lot of
like Watson and others that the
attention is is is it's this really
nested dynamical prioritization thing
and it's constant it gives you this
flowing salience landscape right that's
what attention is doing okay so the the
and where the two where in the paper
that uh that Brett and Mark and I
published is you got predictive
processing comes down to the centrality
of this Precision waiting and then you
get Clark in 2017 saying well that's
task relevance and then no and then
we're back to the relative but what's
happening is the convergences relevance
realization says you know know what
you're actually doing is you're doing
something like this Evolution and
whatever solution that that cognitive
evolution is doing is it's finding these
important trade-off relationships
between efficiency and evolvability
between exploiting the here now and
exploring the there then between being
at the level of the features
zooming in and being at the level of the
Gestalt yeah between looking out into
the world and stepping back and looking
And so there's all so you can think
about each one of these as a domain of
opponent processing yeah right like like
in your in your autonomic nervous system
between the parasipid and then you have
this Mo and where and there and there's
meta opponent processing all of the
opponent processes are also pulling in
and so you get this multi-dimensional
state space that inter oh here that's
like a hierarchy of dialogues yes yes
yes and they're all intersecting and so
the idea was that that is primarily
what's coming out in the predictive like
that's how so you know how Precision
waiting is working it's basically doing
this multi-dimensional opponent
processing this multi-dimensional
complexification this multi-dimensional
evolution of your adapter fit and then
the two models come together and they
fit together and it's like it's like the
marriage between darwinian natural
selection and mendelian genetics the two
theories
dovetail and come together and they
Converge on a solution to the frame
problem
we'll be back in one moment first we
wanted to give you a sneak peek at
Jordan's new series Exodus
so the Hebrews created history as we
know it
you don't get away with anything and so
you might think you can bend the fabric
of reality and that you can treat people
instrumentally and that you can bow to
the Tyrant and violate your conscience
without cost you will pay the piper it's
going to call you out of that slavery
into Freedom even if that pulls you into
the desert
see that there's something else going on
here that is far more Cosmic and deeper
than what you can imagine the highest
ethical Spirit to which we're beholden
is presented precisely as that spirit
that allies itself with the cause of
Freedom against tyranny
I want villains to get punished but do
you want the villains to learn before
they have to pay the ultimate price
that's such a Christian question
okay so so and then I'll be able to use
that to talk about okay okay well I
wanted to just make a segue here that
people might find interesting I think
all that's modeled extremely well
particularly by symphonic music because
what you have if you listen to to to
symphonic music what you see is there's
dialogues at the level of the instrument
right so there'll be a proposition and
then a counter response and then all
those dialogues are structured
hierarchically in relationship to a
higher order structure and that's the
melodic Integrity of the entire piece
and people will align themselves with
that right and so you can see this
multi-dimensional processing occurring
in a musical piece that speaks to the
core issue of reality which is actually
the Harmony and the beauty of the piece
itself and so and and that means that
that deep meaning that you're describing
is pointing to something like the
optimized balance between multiple
levels of processing simultaneously and
some of that is also so temporal right
balancing the here and now as you said
with the what did you call it they're
there they're there and then right right
and so the the reality is the emergent
balance between all those different
viewpoints right than any given
Viewpoint and it flows
right like so think that this is perfect
because you know music is basically
playing with our salience landscaping
for the sake of playing it's computer
it's uh it's for for me it's in the
being mode it's not the having mode
we're not trying to do anything we're
we're in pure development because we're
doing Pure Play we play Pure Play yeah
music is the closest what Rex Murphy
said all music all art aspires to the
condition of music right and notice how
music is not in you or it's yes between
it's fundamental the resonance the
between this the connectedness the
efficiency that in dancing right and
then rusin John Russett and bearing
witness to Epiphany and I got to talk to
John Russen he he said and this is so
and he admits it because he's deeply
influenced by Plato this is such a
platonic thing no think about how
intelligibility is basically there's a
musicality to intelligence right so
there are rhythms right and then there's
Melodies everything has its through line
which is like a melody and then the
Melodies and the Rhythm go together with
an overarching Harmony and you're
getting all of this salience land and
right and so music and that's all
pointing to something like an ultimate
unity and so fundamental the one in
neoplatonism yeah right right and I want
to talk to you about that one idea too
so we will get into that a little bit
later but to return to Consciousness yes
okay so uh and Consciousness is closely
associated with uh with of course with
the tension with working memory and with
fluid fluid intelligence yes yes right
yes and and of course there there's a
you know there's there's quite high
levels of correlation between working
memory and standard measures of G yes
they might be the same thing even maybe
maybe or very close they're close yes
um so here's the idea
and I'm going to do up that plausibility
argument so if you take a look at many
of so there's two different there's well
there's three questions I did I did this
at Thunder Bay there's three questions
about Consciousness okay one is what's
the nature of Consciousness how does
this weird non-physical thing exist in
the physical universe that's the right
there's but there's the function problem
what does Consciousness do since you can
do so much Behavior as an intelligent
zombie right right why not all of it
yeah why not yeah yeah absolutely okay
and then because you do well your
cerebellum is a good example of that
right I think there's more neurons in
this area cortex yeah and it's not
conscious by any by by any normal
measures so it's like obviously
Consciousness isn't a mere consequence
of neural activity no no right so much
of that's unconscious and and then it
does beg the question if so much of it
is unconscious why not all of it right
and then the third question is a meta
question what's the relationship between
the nature and the function question
um here's what I actually agree with
Descartes I disagree with a lot of
current philosophy Descartes
tries to argue answer those two
questions in an integrated fashion the
nature question that a function question
should be answered together
what we tend to do in modern academic
philosophy and science is we tend to
separate them uh we we talk about just
the function problem or just the hard
problem which is the nature problem and
and that if you just think about it for
a minute that's very problematic trying
to talk about function without talking
about nature is very very problematic
and and vice versa trying to talk about
the nature of something without talking
about how it functions with respect to
other things very very problematic
there's a longer argument there I'm just
giving you the gist so you want to or so
what but if you take a look right if you
take a look at some of the leading
theories uh let's take the global
workspace theory for example and what's
the what's what's the function of
Consciousness in the global way so the
idea is your Consciousness is something
like your computer desktop yeah and your
unconscious has all the files and what
Consciousness is is I can bring anything
on to the desktop and I can manipulate
it and then I can broadcast it back to
whatever I need right and you can and
well you update your unconscious doing
that too right because part of what
Consciousness does seem to do is to
assess faulty unconscious actions
recalibrate them and re-jig them so
Consciousness is this thing that moves
up and down the hierarchy of unconscious
and regulates it right but here's here's
the thing and this of course is the
frame problem you can't check all of
them yeah right right there's definitely
a problem so and this is I'm not
imposing this on bar Shanahan and bars
right with the public they and bars
explicitly argued Shanahan has gone up
and Shanahan's important because
Shanahan is literally the person who
like uh you know writes the Stanford
encyclopedia article on the frame
problem right and so they argue that one
of the functions of Consciousness is to
help solve the issue of relevance
realization the problem of relevance now
I don't think their solution works but
that that's not that's not the issue
they're saying look the function of
Consciousness is to do enhanced
relevance realization then you look at
the work of Borah and Seth and they say
well what's the function of
Consciousness the function of
Consciousness is like and think about
the relationship to working memory it's
to it's to reorganize and restructure
like like chunking so we can yeah right
right yeah yeah but but then it's and
why when do we need that well we need it
in situations compare when you can drive
your car like a zombie and when you
can't drive yourself a zombie right when
when I need Consciousness when something
axiomatic has moved well yeah yes and it
cashes out in this way the problem I'm
facing is now ill-defined rather than a
well-defined yes for me the problem is
messy there's there's sudden that's a
pass links yes yes
and right uh there's novelty there is
now stuff that I was previously able to
discard as irrelevant error that I can't
discard as a relevant error anymore so
and that would be associated with the
fact that you'd have an automatized
solution to whatever set of problems was
making themselves manifest that's right
you don't have to attend to it because
you've already taken it into account
even your perceptions has taken it into
account and allow a lot of little
regular Networks to run it yes right but
now I get into this situation and I need
to go into right A Small World Network I
need to have the system I need to evolve
and enhance my relevance wheel that's
why you get a flash of Consciousness
when you have Insight you actually get
that and so you get that or when
something goes wrong yes right it's like
oh oh yes Consciousness yes who wants
that but okay so and there's a longer
argument here but you can take a look at
you know Clearman's radical plasticity
hypothesis uh tononi's integrated
information basically they all converge
on what Consciousness is doing is it's
higher order relevance realization which
of course is what working memory is
doing like the stuff that our colleague
Lynn hasher was talking about it working
it's not just Miller's holding space
because that doesn't really account for
white chunking is so important no no
it's it's functional it's it's it it it
is sort of the last ditch uh survey of
how good is my relevance realization
before I commit to action in the world
right I think salience is actually just
relevance to your working memory in that
fashion so
the functionality okay so if you let's
say that there's a growing convergence
member plausibility for many different
people onto the function of
Consciousness is higher order recursive
relevance realization your unconscious
has done some preliminary relevance
realization then you do that yes but
this is a demanding and you you ratchet
up the relevance realization is that is
that a plausible okay now if you give me
that
right I can start to talk a lot about
the phenomenology of Consciousness
beyond the functionality but I mean I
need to make a distinction I need to
make an important distinction that has
not been
well I I would argue hasn't been made
very well and therefore there's a deep
equivocation and confound you need to
make a distinction between adjectival
qualia are the felt experience things
you need to make a distinction between
the adjectival qualia and the adverbial
qualia adjectival qualia are greenness
blueness you know that the the ones that
philosophers love to talk about
adverbial qualia are are things like
hereness
nowness
togetherness
now you say well why would I ever need
that okay so positions why are those
adverbial because they're modifications
of how you are connected to the world
they are not specific properties okay so
or do they do or do they does that
correspond to uh a noun that's a noun
verb distinction in some sense right so
it's what things are versus the differ
what would you say qualification
qualities of their function how they
could co-emerge in being and in your
consciousness
so let's let's talk about two pieces of
empirical evidence that support what I'm
saying I'm not just drawing this as
speculation one is and and I've been in
this state
um and it's widely reported many
different uh people across many
different variables culturally history
you can get into what Foreman calls the
pure Consciousness event so you're not
conscious of anything you're not even
conscious of Consciousness you're just
purely conscious it's it's remembering
when we talked about you can step back
and yeah you can step back until you you
can't step back any further because
you'd be trying to step back in
Consciousness into unconsciousness right
and when the pure Consciousness event
there are there are there is no
greenness there is no blueness there is
no Blackness there are there are no
objects there are no things
but you don't black out
what there is is there's a sense of
heareness but it's pureness eternity
right and and presence I should say and
now-ness is that that sense of Eternity
and and then there's everything is one
Unity togetherness so the ureness and
the numbness and the togetherness
don't go away even though the adjectival
quality of do which tells you the
adjective of qualia are not necessary
for Consciousness but the adverbial ones
so do you think of that as an experience
of something akin to the ground of being
yes because here when you're when like
when you're doing is that what is that
the name of the is that the name of God
that was announced to Moses is that the
same idea because well the name is I am
that I am I I was that I am I want to
try and answer that and I want to try
and so I was at I I went to
um
uh where I went to the respond Retreat
and in Vermont and I was giving my talk
on relevance realization and I was
getting great questions from monks and I
was actually interacting with other
theorists and I came to what I think is
an important Insight so your system is
doing relevance realization and that is
giving you the complexification of the
world it's giving you the world of
things but as you said organized like in
right so it's giving you this but you
can come to the and one of the things
relevance realization is interested in
is relevance realizing that's what an
Insight is you realize oh my way of
realizing what's relevant was actually
wrong I have to restructure yeah so it's
intrinsically because it's intrinsically
evolving and self-correcting it is
intrinsically interested in itself okay
so I can do relevance realization on the
world and that's that that is relevance
realization of beings
but relevance realization has to realize
its own irrelevance with respect to
being it has to let you have to stop
trying to thinkify your experience
that's movement up Jacobs okay so yeah
okay so in The Exodus story what happens
with Moses is that he's walking through
the desert so he's confused in some
sense and something attracts his
attention yes right it's the burning
bush and it doesn't like announce itself
in some magnificent way it glimmers in
the shadows of his perception but then
he investigates it so imagine this
imagine that something glimmers to
attract your attention that's Mercury by
the way yes he's the winged messenger
Hermes yeah trying to attract your
attention so now you pursue that and now
you pursue it deeply and the deeper you
pursue it the farther you get away from
the particulars of the phenomenon itself
and the closer you get to something like
generalized being and that seems to be
the idea that's implicit in that story
of the burning bush and the announcement
of the name of God yes but so what
happened this is you know this is from
Gregory of Nissa and and his work on
Moses going up right at the mountain and
all the way to Nicholas of kuza right
the burning bush is inherently
paradoxical
right because yes right right because
it's a it's it's something that is
destroying itself but is maintained
right right right and so it's underneath
generation and destruction it's
underneath all of the mechanisms by
which being is particularized it is
trying to point I am that I am or
actually I will be what I will right
right right and so it is trying to point
to the ground of being as opposed to the
world and what yeah what does Moses try
and come and it's a paradox as you said
it's so interesting because a paradox is
pointing the way to that that's sort of
you you talked I think in your lecture
at Ralston about the idea that the
parables in the New Testament are
basically Zen cones yeah yeah they're
paradoxes that are designed to produce a
state of insight yeah and that's the
grip of imagination by relevance
realization and a pointer to something
that's beyond it exactly exactly you get
gripped by the Paradox and different
Moses try to comprehend it no he takes
off his shoes and he goes into reverence
right right right right that's why he
takes off his shoes yeah because he now
he knows he's standing on Holy Ground
and so the attempt to name is abandoned
even that doesn't mean you stop naming
yeah ridiculous yeah that would be the
abandonment of of Sanity right in some
real sense there is there's a moment
when the relevance realization right can
point to its own irrelevance when you
are trying to not grip anything yeah
you're trying to be opened to the ground
of everything right right right so
that's how I would answer and the
utility okay so now the utility of being
open to the ground of everything let me
lay this out you tell me what you think
about this so so you might say well
do does everything have to converge on
one that's the monotheistic question in
some real sense well let's say forget
that question for a minute let's look at
the alternative things don't converge
yes okay so what's this psychological
State associated with non-convergence
well there's two if I if I have a
multitude of goals
and if they're a multitude that means
they conflict because if they didn't
conflict they'd be a Unity so I have a
multitude of goals okay so that's an
entropy problem and I'm going to be
chaotic confused and anxious as a
consequence so that's one consequence
and the second consequence is if
positive emotion is associated with
movement towards a goal but I have
multiple fractured goals then the
intensity of my positive emotion that's
my enthusiasm and that's possession by
God by the way then my enthusiasm is
diminished so the alternative to the
vision of a monotheistic Unity is a
chaotic plurality that's associated with
the decrement in motivation and
enthusiasm yes now that doesn't answer
the question of what that ultimate unity
might be right but it does at least
point out the consequences of not
assuming that such a thing exists it's
basically the you could call it the
Psychopathology of polytheism it's
something like that and and when that's
manifested socially this is also
something interesting if you and I
cannot agree on a Unity of vision
now in the moment we're we're both
exploring and we agree on that so we can
sit here without conflict if we cannot
agree on a Unity of vision then we are
in Conflict yes those are the only
options yeah so now we have this problem
there has to be a Unity or else these
are the consequences and then the
mystery is well what constitutes that
Unity yeah I totally agree I mean uh you
see arguments from platinus and Spinoza
basically doing that that move which is
right I I think I mean there are some
things you can say about the unity it
can't be at any level below Ultimate
Reality right right right it has to be
because that's sort of the definition of
Ultimate Reality yes exactly exactly and
and then you get it's so I could add to
the psychological the epistemic right to
understand something and to grasp it its
reality is is an act of integration it's
a it's a you know yeah right and so
think about what science does here's all
these disparate phenomena and I get have
a unifying understanding and then here's
two different Theory here's darwinian
natural selection here's mendelian
genetics and I get I get modern
evolutionary theory the grand synthesis
right and why what and why are
scientists trying to find the old yeah
and those are profound syntheses and
they're profound because they point to a
deep underlying Unity exactly exactly
and this is the neoplatonic argument and
then and then you add in the argument I
did at length and Ralston if reality
isn't or if that fundamental grammar of
intelligibility doesn't conform to a
fundamental grammar yes right right we
are doomed we are we're doomed to a
radical solipsism a radical so it's not
you can't you I I would argue and I
would ask people to look at the longer
argument at Ralston but you can't take
the content position that yes that is
the grammar of intelligibility but
reality is somehow fundamentally
different because like just like Clark's
argument the different Clark Samuel
Clark like Kant presupposes the
existence of other Minds with an
epistemology that gives him no way of
acknowledging the existence of other
Minds why is he writing the damn
critique if he doesn't think why is he
upset when he doesn't get the reception
Because he believes that there are other
Minds right that and they and they're
and they're real and they're out there
and he somehow has access to them and
they have alternative frame like right
so his implicit presuppositions explicit
for suppositions don't matter he's in a
performative contradiction and so if you
and so the neoplatonic argument is not
the particulars but the grammar of
intelligibility and the grammar of
reality how's the ultimately okay so
this is actually really why I wanted to
talk to you today so this this issue
here so I did a lecture for Ralston as
well at Ephesus on the Greek idea of the
logos yes yes so okay so I want to I
want to I want to ask you some questions
about this and I suppose this has
something to do possibly with
neoplatonism and Buddhism and
Christianity sure okay so
let's we'll open with the question about
what might constitute this ultimate
unity now you can think about it as a
phenomenological unity in some sense and
and put it in the objective space but
but I want to make a different case so I
think the ultimate unity is better
conceptualized as something that you
might term a spirit and and we can get
into your decision yeah Jonathan as well
yeah yeah yeah okay okay so so a spirit
is an animating principle or a set of
animating principles and a universal
Spirit would be the same set of
animating principles animating a lot of
people simultaneously right so
um it's like a meme in the in the dark
and sense right it's like a hyper Meme
and so the question is well why should
you conceptualize that as a spirit so
let me offer a proposition about what's
happening in the biblical Corpus okay so
okay so there's some attempt to specify
the implicit unity and the way the
biblical Corpus does that is by laying
out a sequence of narratives and the
narratives stress a different yes
ultimate unity right so for example in
the story of Noah here's the unity
that's being pointed to so you have Noah
characterized as someone who's a wise
man for his time and place which is all
any all of us anything all any of us
could hope for yeah now Noah has a
intuition that the storms are coming
and he has faith in the intuition and
acts on it and then God is characterized
as the source of the intuition and faith
in Noah's case is characterized as the
willingness to abide by that intuition
that's the story against all the people
that are criticizing and against all
other things that might occupy his
attention he prioritizes that yes yes
okay so he met that and that's how he
manifests faith in it that's right okay
so now another story bumps up against
that and the next story is the Tower of
Babel yeah and they're very different
narratives and so what you have here is
this and this is actually related to
this problem of criticality but we won't
go into that you have this proposition
that human beings can build these towers
of abstraction
that can become totalitarian in your
essence right and that God punishes that
yeah yeah he fragments the fragments it
and makes people confused yeah okay so
now that's a very different picture of
God the Noah God yeah okay but they're
contiguous yeah they call that metonymy
yeah so there's uh an implication by
juxtaposition that there's an identity
between those two different things but
they're very diverse okay so then I'll
just do two more of these so then you
have the story of Abraham yep now
Abraham is a slow starter right so he's
very wealthy his parents are wealthy he
lives a very privileged and sheltered
life but a spirit makes itself manifest
to him and the spirit is the Call to
Adventure and so God in the abrahamic
story is the spirit that calls even the
comfortable out to the catastrophic
adventure of their life and that's
juxtaposed against these other two
spirits then you have let's say Moses
now you have a different
characterization of the ultimate unity
and the ultimate unity in the story of
Moses is the unity that announces itself
in the burning bush but also the spirit
that punishes the Tyrant yeah and that
calls the slaves out of slavery and okay
so now the open Future too
meaning the gods of Egypt are gods of
location and function the god of Moses
and even even so this is a development
of the god of Abraham the god of Moses
travels with people through space and
time into an open Future that they right
right okay and that's a that's a
reference as far as I can tell back to
the opening lines of Genesis because God
characterizes himself at the beginning
of the book of Genesis I think in terms
that are very much akin to the terms
we've been using to describe
Consciousness itself because God is the
thing that confronts the pluri potential
chaos and that's really if you look at
what uh what is what's the word
that's really what it means it means
pluri potential chaos is something like
that he confronts that plural potential
chaos and
generates habitable or the habitable
order that is good out of it and that's
the image of God in man those are
identified as the same thing and this is
so crucial because it also implies so
one of the questions my students used to
always ask me is how do you know that
what you're teaching us isn't just
another ideology because I was trying to
teach counter-adiology and that's a
really good question that's right it's
the question right it is it is the
question but if if imagine that you
could have a story that concentrates on
the process by which functional stories
are generated well this is what I wanted
to say to you I think what you're
getting I mean a spirit is something
like a multiply realizable like you know
generative function what I mean by that
is you're trying to find the through
line each one of the think about
remember I did the multi-dimensional
opponent processing each one of these
narratives is an opponent processing
it's clean versus disabled yeah and
there's this and but there's also right
there's Egypt versus the promises yeah
yeah Egypt yeah conflict but but Egypt
is exploited here now or explore the
there then that we talked about at the
core of relevance remember they talk
about the flesh parts of Egypt is like
that this you but if we stay here right
there's so much we could just exploit
right but right well that's what the
Israelites get get uh what would you
nostalgic about when they're in the
desert because that's right their
immediate needs are no longer being
gratified and that causes them to become
faithless and and and fractious so what
I'm I'm suggesting to you is like I'll
just use the The Exodus story though as
one of it but all of them I would argue
what myth is always doing we're often
doing and Levy stress had sort of a
sense of this with structuralism but
what it's it's doing is it's pointing
you to opponent processing
and and then you can think of okay
here's this myth with disappointed
processing here's this myth with this
opponent processing what's the through
lines and then what I do is I I try to
find like like what you're doing what I
was talking about earlier you're trying
to find the multi-dimensional like Nexus
the through line of the meta of the
ministry line yeah of all the opponent
processing you're trying to you're
trying to say okay all of the relevance
realization if I if I could do all the
trade-offs this is Nicholas of kuza with
his open sense of infinity in the
ancient Greek World in Infinity is a bad
thing it's chaos but with kuza it opens
up into and then the whole neoplatonic
tradition into a positive thing it's
like no no if I could get all of the of
all of the Opposites I would see that in
Infinity they all coincide The
Coincidence of the opposite right
and that would be the culmination not in
in any entity and that would be sort of
the summation of what our cognition is
about it would be sort of I would have
found the source of intelligibility
because I would have moved to the
deepest grammar of cognition which would
get me and that's the resolution of all
opposing conflicts and some okay so
here's an interesting question so I've
been thinking about this recently so
talking with Peugeot so there's this
idea in the um in the story of Adam and
Eve that suffering doesn't descend upon
the world until the sin of Adam and Eve
yeah and I've been trying to take that
apart with Matthew pasgow most
particularly yeah believes that Matthew
believes that the sin of Even Adam was
something like pride and so Eve hearken
to the voice of The Serpent and the
serpent in some sense is that which is
poisonous in and and the fruit that it
offers is inedible in its Essence and
Eve's pride is that she can even speak
for the poisonous and inedible and
Adam's pride is that he'll hearken to
the voice of Eve and so and so and I
like that idea I like the idea that
pride comes before a fall and that we
can bite off more than we can chew and
that men's Pride uh what would you say
motivates them to attempt to appear
bigger than they are in the eyes of
women and that women's Pride motivates
them to incorporate under the guise of
compassion more than they can eat let's
say now there's a Christian idea and a
Jewish idea as well that suffering
doesn't descend upon the world until
this sin takes place now so you can
imagine imagine that you followed the
through line of meaning assiduously and
you were able to bring the Opposites
into coincidence and you'd have to do
that with proper epistemic humility of
course right and openness to possibility
the question would be in some sense is
to what degree do your moral errors
actually constitute the suffering to
begin with and then to what degree do
you think the suffering itself can be
ameliorated
and I mean maybe
eliminated in favor of something like
the spirit of play if you followed the
through line of meaning religiously
um
right I mean and that's because
I have this sympathy to the idea that
that unbearable suffering in some senses
built into the structure of reality
itself right because we're finite and
Mortal creatures that makes you more of
a Buddhist well yes right right although
although you see the same emphasis in
Judaism right with the tragic sense of
history and of course the fact that the
central figure in Christianity is
crucified in some sense speaks to the
same thing but then it there is an open
question there right which is well yes
suffering is built into finitude but
it's clearly the case that we exaggerate
multiply it by failing to hit the mark
you know and so I think we can
ameliorate it
um I happen to think that the very
processes of relevance realization that
make us adaptive make us perennially
susceptible to self-deception that's my
interpretation of the first Noble Truth
of Buddhism the very processes like like
just look at the the heuristic and bias
literature it's double name for a good
reason I can't do I can't actually
calculate formal probability of events
it's combinatorially yeah so I have to
use the representative heuristic and the
availability heuristic right but
and there's and and the work of Kurt
I'll be talking about this in the course
right gigarettes and others is in many
situations that outperform admit in real
world messy ill-defined situations where
there's real uncertainty not risk
we've confused those two the risk is you
can assign a probability right right but
real uncertainty these heuristics
actually do really really well but they
do make you prone to mistake you take
your loved one to the airport and you
say don't you say all these euphemisms
for don't die like text me when you're
there safe trip because you can easily
imagine a plane crashing and when a
plane crashes it's not a crashes it's a
disaster it's a tragedy so the
availability and the representative
heuristics are getting triggered like
mad and then you get back in your car
the North American death machine without
giving it a second thought and that's an
act of self-deception right and it's a
significance so you're not properly
calibrating your level of affect and
arousal to the risks you're facing
that's that's what I mean when I think
the very things that I can't get rid of
the heuristics because then I would face
combinatorial explosion if I try and do
the probability calculations but this is
the no free lunch theorem right well
that's that's the complicating factor of
how much of so you might say well how
much of suffering is due to the
intrinsic nature of finite finitude
that's infinitude how much is due to
ignorance and uh inevitable blindness
and then how much is due to failure to
hit the mark and wisdom is about being
able to differentiate those and properly
calibrate your efforts to that
differentiation
elaborate on that so so
Plato Drew Highland finite Transcendence
Plato's whole argument is we are finite
Transcendent we are being capable of
transcending ourselves but if we only
pay attention to that we fall prey to
hubris right right if we if we only pay
attention to our finity we fall prey to
tyranny and servitude right we have to
keep the two in ongoing opponent
processing and that's and what we want
what we keep trying to do is resolve it
into one of these or the other and we
keep going back and forth and Plato is
about you know you can't resolve that
you have to always hold those two into
together right so and that means you
have to you have to properly realize
like so there's no salute there's no the
solution is participation in the process
that continues to generate the solution
so let me give you a strong analogy when
we've been invoked is there a final form
of life and evolution that makes no
sense if you understand Evolution there
isn't defined if there isn't a
culminating life form that's not that's
not the that's not there's no intention
functionality to Evolution but you know
I'm just speaking that way right there's
there's no there's no project of ah now
now we'll have the organism that will
never suffer the possibility of
Extinction that's impossible you can't
do that I think that and if relevance
realization the meaning is a kind of you
know ongoing rapid cognitive Evolution
there is no final form of that this is
one of the areas where I criticized the
platonic framework Plato's notion of of
the sacred as completion static
Perfection that I find is very
problematic because I don't think it
actually sits well with his notion of
and Socrates I like to think of Music in
that regard too and you think about what
Bach does in particular I really love
the Brandenburg concertos because what
Bach does is he brings a phrase to a
magnificent conclusion and then out of
that emerges another set of
possibilities that he brings to another
magnificent conclusion and it seems to
me that that's a nice model for the
unfolding of being right it's yes to
attain a goal and then to pull out of
that goal a new goal that transcends the
previous goal and to do that
indefinitely that's the
self-organization and then maybe you do
have as a final solution in some sense
to that the acquiescence to that process
okay so let me ask you that the sorry
but isn't that the ultimate version of
your metagame yes
yes definitely absolutely okay so let's
let's revolution of this in Christianity
especially in eastern Orthodoxy you see
it with Gregory of niss Nissa and and
you see it in Maximus and uh it's this
notion of epictasis that we don't come
to rest in God right what God is is God
is the The Meta affordance so that we
continually
self-transcend through God yeah yeah we
never that's the Jacob's Ladder Vision
yes too right right to ascend
continually towards a a destination
that's infinitely receding that's right
right and it grows as it receives right
and but this is the thing the infinity
is not inaccessible to you right it
because the infinity is not just
receding from you it's also reaching
towards you and this is reality reality
is constantly shining into your frame
with intelligibility and constantly
receding out into the mystery and and I
think the the and that's the that's the
parallel of the Greek idea of the logos
I think with the judeo-christian idea of
the logos I think so too I mean there's
lots of people who who won't like that
but I I think the notion of the logos
um that it's you know especially as you
see it coming through the neapolitanic
tradition and taken up into Dia logos
into dialect yeah I think I think that
deeply converges uh I mean the I mean
the the Christian model is ultimately a
model of that and and this is you know
I'm not going to try and do anything but
the Paradox of of the unity Trinity is
an attempt to somehow say there's
something inherently dialogical I would
argue yeah about
um how we how we come into relationship
with Ultimate Reality right right and
that's right and it's an attempt to
solve the problem of unity and
multiplicity as well
um
so I'd be looking at the transformations
of the image of God in the biblical
Corpus we know the biblical Corpus is an
assembled library right and we don't
exactly understand the process by which
the stories came to follow one another
and how they interacted with each other
exactly exactly so it's a mystery but
it's a mystery of collective intuition
it's something like that yeah
yes yes and and and it's something like
uh distributed Insight because what
happens is there's different forms of
juxtaposition and some of them catch on
people go oh yes that works but they
don't know why which is very interesting
thing so you have the Old Testament
Corpus in Christianity followed by the
New Testament Corpus and there's a new
proposition here I want you to tell me
what you think about this so
um one of the things that
psychotherapists have learned across
disciplines in the last hundred years is
that if you get people to voluntarily
confront what they're afraid of avoiding
disgusted by and inclined to be
willfully blind about they get bravery
it isn't habituation it's not
uh the substitution of relaxation for
anxiety because you can do it without
relaxation training it seems to be
contingent on the willingness to do the
voluntary confrontation yeah but but
that means I think that really means a
willingness to break down to a degree to
like to there has to be so the
willingness can't be mere assertion
it can't be it has to be it's not it's
not it's not propositional yeah it has
to do it yeah you have to do it and
there has and there has to be a
vulnerability there has to be a real
willingness to learn and to be yeah
that's humility yes humility yeah
epistemic and moral humility yeah and so
I think my my is it what you're doing is
you you're actually making use of
dialogue or perhaps even Dia logos yeah
in order to afford the complexification
of the person's competence which is
actually what they are ultimately seeing
yeah yes yes well you do that in part by
demonstrating to them that they can find
the zone of proximal development exact
voluntary confrontation right so if
you're exposing to someone to an
elevator that they're afraid of they
might not get in the elevator but they
will stand 40 feet away and look at it
right again 39 Progressive
desensitization yeah which is not a good
term because what it is in fact is it's
Progressive generalizable adaptation
exactly right that's a very different
thing yes and that's what I was going to
argue I was going to argue it's actually
Progressive complex vacation of their
cognitive capacity they can manage more
and more of the variables without being
overwhelmed by the potentialities that
are presenting well and they also have a
chance to observe themselves acting out
the proposition that they are those
creatures right because one of the
metacognitions that goes along with
phobic avoidance is I can't handle this
yes and so then you put the person in
the situation challenge that yeah and
you show well yes under certain
circumstances not only can you handle
this but you find it optimally
challenging and it's really good for
your development and so basically what
you do is you put someone you're using
exposure therapy you put them into the
zone that everyone occupies when they're
learning optimally it's exactly the same
thing but the zone is exactly that place
between assimilation and accommodation
that we were talking about earlier right
you're trying to get you're trying to
get them to see
if you'll allow me some of my language
that it's not the problem isn't just
subjectively in them I can't get in the
elevator no no there's a real
relationship that you that you are
capable of evolving between like you can
and you can and you and you can evolve
your cognition so that you can get into
the elevator right so that you can
confront what you're afraid of I had one
client the door is finally opened at the
elevator and she said that's a tomb and
I thought well we're we're
simultaneously exposing you in this
Freudian symbolic manner not only to the
elevator but to the idea of your own
finitude and mortality and that was
definitely happening at the same time eh
yeah okay so there's so imagine that the
biblical corpuses is assembled and
there's multiple pictures of the spirit
of God that characterize the Old
Testament and then there's a culmination
at least from the Christian Perspective
in the New Testament but here's the idea
of the culmination
the idea is that the same spirit that
called Noah to prepare for catastrophe
and the same spirit that called Abraham
out of his comfort to the adventure of
his life is the spirit that is
motivating people to voluntarily
confront the catastrophic suffering of
their life it's the same idea and then
that idea gets transformed even one more
one more in one more profound manner
which is
not only is that the same Spirit now
humanized right because that's something
you can actually act out but that if you
do act it out that that inverts the
tragedy and so the hypothesis is that
there's a there's a paradoxical balance
between the degree to which you're
willing to voluntarily take on the
suffering of your life and your ability
to simultaneously transcend the
suffering and that in the final analysis
the more you're willing to Bear the
burden of being voluntarily the less
suffering is actually associated with
that the more play right the more the
more progression up Jacob's Ladder and
so like okay two things what do you
think about the proposition that seems
to emerge there that that's the same
spirit and and that that's reasonably
construed as a spirit and what do you
think about that as a proposition I mean
you tend to take to come at this from a
more Buddhist perspective so or
neoplatonic I mean right right right so
for for me
um
uh
that Pro I mean that process that
process of being able to find the
through lines of the deeper for me when
you're talking about a spirit you're
talking about like a dynamical
self-organizing system that's generative
in the way we've been talking about and
it doesn't just generate being it
generates the intelligibility of being
so right and that's logos yes right
right and so for for me trying to find
right the through line right so this has
a logos and this has a logos but what's
the logos of all of these right right
right and and it right and it's this
nested and and that maps onto everything
we've been talking about about cognition
intelligence and Consciousness the
recursive relevance realization the
predictive processing oh like for me
those two things sing and if the the
argument about the grammar of reality
has to be our cognition has to be deeply
conformable to that then for me that's
that's something the neoplateness talk
and then so what the neoplatonists are
doing right
is they're they're taking Plato and
they're finding that Spirit right the
Plato's the spirit that takes you out of
the Cave the ascent the recipients yeah
and I'd like to come back to that and
then you've got the Aristotelian Spirit
which is the the the idea of knowing as
conforming and the scientific project of
trying to get an organized systematic
understanding and then you have the
stoic system of no no logos is how do I
best integrate my agency so that I can
be most virtuously disposed to the world
so that I am not overwhelmed by the
tragedy but I can right right and then
and and and and then so neoplatonism is
like that grand unified field Theory uh
of of the whole philosophical spiritual
tradition of Socrates this is what I'm
doing in my series after Socrates is
tracing that out right you should just
tell everybody now about that so so that
everybody listening knows
so which so just continue talking like
that sure yeah so uh on January 9th I'm
releasing my new series
um uh after Socrates it'll be free on
Youtube it'll be released uh twice a
week Mondays and Thursdays and I'm
really trying to play with the format
and and bring to light
um this this this whole through line
that runs from Socrates to people like
Nicholas of kuza and I Regina right and
and what what it is is there's there's a
continuing lectures series that build a
continuous argument like I did in
Awakening for the meeting crisis but I
also have a section on points to ponder
so and this is to encourage people to
reflect and to discuss with each other
and then I also teach a practice I move
out of the propositional and there's a
pedagogical program of practices that is
also unfolding in parallel to the
lectures and then I also move out of the
monologue because I'm trying to be
Socratic right and so I have I have
episodes where I'll be with other people
and the four of us will demonstrate a
whole all Ecology of practices and then
I'm also trying to put the whole
Socratic right away into dialogue with
like with with Christianity uh because
that's what happened in the west right
right right and so uh like there's a
there's a series within the series
Christopher Master Pietro and I we meet
and we go into dialogue because we're
doing crooked guards confrontation with
Socrates and kirkegaard's wrestling of
this and I would say it's opponent
processing he's constant so he's a
follower of Christ but Socrates is his
teacher and he's constantly toggling
between those and you can see this very
powerful that's an opponent process
that's at work in western civilization
exactly exactly and so Chris and I are
bringing that out and so what I'm trying
to do is I'm trying to I'm trying to
people can get access to this on your
YouTube channel exactly so you can just
look up John verviki find his YouTube
channel we'll put the links in the
description of this video and so
my what I'm trying to do is it's called
after Socrates because I'm I I I I'm
after Socrates and that I'm trying to
understand him right I'm trying to what
because there's he's a deeply enigmatic
figure and and importantly so because I
one of the the great things that about
the socratic dialogues is Socrates never
Socrates is always in that zone of
proximal development he's all he's all
he's shining in enough to your
intelligibility and then he puts you
into aporia that state where you a
perplexity and wonder because he wants
to also open you up to the mystery and
he's constantly and so I want I'm after
Socrates in that sense and I'm after
Socrates and that I want to try and
reverse engineer this practice of
dialectic and to deal with not hegelian
dialectic platonic dialectic and there's
all this new work on it so dialectics is
a practice and deal logo is a process
yeah you get it like well Dia logos is
the practice of psychotherapy I think so
it is it's the Redemptive practice of
psychotherapy right the mutual
exploration of the true truth that
redeems so
crates is you know is about this is easy
to say and it is hard to realize in both
senses of the word of understanding to
make real
to be able to follow the logos wherever
it goes and and to do that
comprehensively profoundly percolating
through different layers of the psyche
permeating many different domains of
your life getting that ultimate
profundity that ultimate kind of
plausibility and that ultimate unity yes
yes and so and and intensity of purpose
because when things become unified in
relationship to the purpose it makes you
in some sense comparatively Unstoppable
well it's a good thing you to be
unstoppable in life because there's
plenty of things that conspire to
attempt to stop you yes and he uh I mean
that's why he actually he dies for it
right well well that's very very
relevant too to our discussion of
transcendent meaning because one of the
things that emerges in the socratic
apologia is the sense that Socrates has
lived a life so deep and meaningful that
he's able to he's able to
abide by his set of moral principles
even in the face of death yes right and
and part of the reason for that appears
to be that
he lived his life fully and and and so
he's satisfied with it in some
fundamental sense right he's not
clinging to it he he so this is the
interesting thing about him I mean you
know Socrates knows that he does not
know and that eventually becomes the
Learned ignorance of Nicholas of kuza
and the ability to wrestle with the
paradoxes and The Coincidence see that
but but he but he does know things he
knows erotica he knows what to care
about which is your point and he also
knows that the unexamined life is not
worth living the life in which you have
not tried to because well it's
unconscious it's unconscious and it's
also going to be your agency is going to
break down you're making yourself more
prayed and self-deception you're
tyrannical you're gonna exactly all of
this stuff and so I'm trying to trace
out but not just Trace out the ideas
because Socrates is ultimately about
this is third what's called Third Way
platonism the the new scholarship
Socrates is ultimately about trying to
get shift people into the
non-propositional because that is
ultimately where virtue is cultivated
you and I both know you can get the
these University professors who are
highly trained in moral argument and
that is in no way predictive of how
virtuously they live their lives
propositional management is at most a
necessary condition for virtue but it is
in no way sufficient and you can see
soccer and Socrates is always
challenging two things he's challenging
just intuitive pronouncement as to what
something is well what is courage is and
he's also challenging sort of third
person right technical definition well I
learned this definition in Secretary
says but do you do you do you reenacted
yes right so he's constantly challenging
the first person perspective of just
spontaneous subjective Authority he's
constantly challenging the third person
imposing technical Authority because
he's trying to constantly get us into
the second person perspective where we
actually enter into the dialogue that
trains us for virtue so he you'll get
like when he's arguing with the two
generals about courage they like one
represents this intuitive the other
represents he learned all these
definitions from the sophist and they're
very sophisticated right right and
Socrates undermines both of those and he
doesn't come to a conclusion but here's
the thing the generals were coming to
Socrates because they're asking where
should we take our sons for Education
because we want them to be courageous
there's no conclusion at the dialogue
but the generals both both generals say
we would like your son our sons to come
and learn from you right right because
Socrates exemplifies the courage in the
dialogue you know you see you see
something similar happening in the
brother's karamazov yeah because you
have Ivan is a very is very able to put
forward extremely compelling
propositional atheistic arguments right
in kind of a nietzschean spirit yeah
real sense right and eliosha who's the
monastic novitiate is no match for Ivan
on the propositional front but he's a
way better person yes and Dostoevsky
also explores that in the idiot because
that's Prince Michigan right it is the
Christ analog for all this purposes
right but Dostoevsky because he uses
narrative rather than philosophy is able
to produce an embodied figure who
exemplifies virtue even though the
propositional grounds for his moral
pronouncements are relatively and what
undeveloped and I think this is a
profound thing and trying to bring that
out and then say so what are the
practices that you started well the so
so uh you want to bring in a Socratic
Socrates was famous for being able to
stand in a meditative state
transfix for 24 to 48 hours ah totally
right so there's a profound capacity for
uh mindfulness and this is why he
famously never got drunk he could drink
quite a bit and but the mindfulness was
like he he could stay I wonder how much
of that hallucinogenic Greek wine he was
consuming while doing all of this I I I
I that I don't know but he had he he has
this tremendous so I start with teaching
people about a basic meditative practice
that's taking off your mental Framing
and looking at it seeing what way it
might be distorting but how do you know
if you've distorted well you have to put
your glasses on and see if you now see
more clearly or deeply and those are
contemplative practices and and I take I
take people through a contemplative
practice uh and you take them into a
kind of uh teach them lectio Divina how
to read the platonic text Not Just for
information but how to get into that
resonance with it so it will bring about
transformation there's a lectio Divina
which is a way of reading and then
there's philosophical Fellowship where
people people sort of do a joint kind of
lectio Divina with each other about a
philosophical text and you're not trying
to is this text right or wrong I'm not
saying you should never do that right
the point of this practice is no no I
want to presence the perspective from
which this text was generated so that I
can enter into a vygotsky and
relationship right with that perspective
because it will challenge me into a zone
of proximately right and then I can
practice being in the zone of proximal
development as a consequence of engaging
in dialogue well that's you know I think
one of the things that maybe
distinguished me to some degree from my
from my peers let's say my academic
peers is that almost every time I read
something my goal was to see what I
could learn from reading it yeah not to
dispense with it like to and I think
it's the same position of reverence that
you described in relationship to Moses
and taking off his shoes it's like yeah
I want to find out what's in this I did
that with Freud and I did that with Jung
and I did do that with the biblical
Corpus not to dispense with it or to
argue it out of existence even though
test ideas is important but to but to be
open to whatever might transform me as a
consequence title to the adverbial right
okay I'm not just so I I like I've had
this many times but one one time really
profound for me was Spinoza Spinoza is
hard Spinoza is like reading Euclid's
elements because it's patterned on
euclide your axioms and proofs and
Theorem and it's the most logical
rigorous thing in your ER and you're
trying to remember all the predicates
this and that and then what happens
though is you get what he talks about
you you go from recursive re uh
discursive reasoning into what he calls
scancia into antiva you see you get this
realization where you see all of the
whole in each premise and each premise
and all of the whole and then you see
all of reality like that and it so you
see you see spinosistically you take on
Spinoza's perspective rather than
remembering his proposition right that's
what I mean about being so yeah well
that's that's something like that's
that's something like ancestor worship
that's something like inhabiting the
spirit of the Divine ancestor because
what you're trying to do one of the
things I loved about University was that
it enabled me to select my peers from
among the great men of history now I'm
not saying I was able to manage that but
I at least had that opportunity right
each of those people was animated well I
would say by a central in some sense by
a central exploratory and benevolent
Spirit insofar as they were
manifestations of logos so this is so
you get I'm doing these practices with
people that are you know nuns n-o-n-e-s
secular and they'll but they'll say well
that was like a spirit that was like a
secular Seance right because I felt like
Spinoza was present right right and so
what happens is you get you get that we
agency you get that you get that you get
the the spirit of the distributed
cognition that is not reducible to a
mere aggregation of individual
consciousnesses you get that you get you
get that you get that emergent Dynamic
like a rock concert yes exactly exactly
but you're doing it with intelligibility
rather than just Salient sounds yeah
right and and well so that isn't it but
that also is we we can stay pretty
forthrightly that that is an experience
of a profoundly unifying spirit because
it wasn't people wouldn't be able to
inhabit the same conceptual and
perceptual space simultaneously so you
take people through this progression you
get them into that and then you take
them into dialectic into dialogues where
you actually get them to get that
Collective Flow State around the
examination of a virtue and right right
and the group acts like as a a a and
people are shifting rules to group acts
like Socrates to the individual and
everybody is switching around and what
happens is people get this Collective
Spirit logos shows up the fire of Harry
and people people are suddenly drawn and
what happens is they go from all their
propositions about virtue to saying they
experience awe and reverence about the
virtue and they and right right and then
they also say they'll report this sort
of progression of intimacies they'll say
I I discovered a kind of intimacy with
people that I didn't know existed but
I've always wanted right right it's not
friendship it's not sexuality I I use
the Christian term Fellowship it's
Fellowship right right and and and and
and then and then they do this neat
thing they'll go from you and I are
experiencing this kind of intimacy too
we all are experiencing intimacy with
the logos yeah and then
that they can also go to
you and I intimacy with each other with
the logos and all of that is becoming
more intimate with being itself yeah I'm
talking about feeling more connected to
real that's dialectic into theologous
okay well so if all of you are inclined
to
um uh be interested in this sort of
thing you can go over to John's YouTube
channel and follow his series of
lectures it's going to launch win
January 9th and just so you all know too
uh
um some of you may know that I've
started this Academy with my daughter
Peterson Academy which is a an attempt
to bring Humanities and liberal arts
education to people on a large scale and
we have a lot of professors lined up to
help us with that about 30 so far top
rate top rate people as far as I'm
concerned and John is actually going
down to Miami this week to record a
series of lectures that will add up to
about eight hours on the sorts of topics
that we discussed today exactly exactly
so okay so everyone we have to stop
unfortunately because we could continue
pretty much forever and hopefully will
and I'd like to thank all of you for
attending watching and listening today
and to encourage you to check out John
viveki's YouTube channel and to follow
his lectures
um I'm uh there's no doubt that if you
participate that in that with some
degree of intent that the consequences
will be transformative John was and he
is one of the most popular lectures that
the University of Toronto ever produced
and his students were constantly raving
to me when I was still there
um about the Transformations they had
encountered both intellectually and I
would say personally as a consequence of
taking John's courses so this is a good
deal so go go and go and check that out
and I'm going to turn over to the Daily
wire plus platform now and talk to John
more on the biographical level for a
while I want to trace the development of
his through line through his life which
is what I tend to use the extra half an
hour for and so for all you watching and
listening happy New Year and thank you
very much for your time and attention
and don't hesitate to check out John
viveki's YouTube channel ciao thanks
John thanks great as always thank you
yep
hello everyone I would encourage you to
continue listening to my conversation
with my guest on dailywireplus.com